---
title: "WOC 2017 Day One"
date: 2017-06-30T00:00:00+00:00
author: james
permalink: /woc-2017-day-one/
excerpt: "The 34th World Orienteering Championships are underway in Tartu, Estonia"
category:
  - WOC-2017
---
The 34th World Orienteering Championships are underway in Tartu, Estonia so here's James' round up of the first day's events.

## GB News
Kris Jones has pulled out of tomorrow's Sprint Final due to a sustained injury he picked up at the 10,000m European Championships earlier this month. He is now going to focus on being ready for Sunday's Mixed Sprint Relay.

Most importantly, the GB Team have come up with [a quiz](http://gbteamwoc2017.blogspot.com.ee/2017/06/team-gb-quiz-round-1.html) to test your orienteering knowledge (or maybe your skill at guessing) - Simon reckons he's aced the Orienteer or Premier League Footballer round.

Oh and they also did some orienteering, which you can read all about in my report [here](https://www.britishorienteering.org.uk/news/3789).

## Things You Might Have Missed
Seeing as Team Maprunner were on a flight for 90% of the Sprint Qualifier, today's installment of TYMHM comes from the opening ceremony, held in the Old Town Square in Tartu. Perhaps a little understated, it was slightly surreal when we found ourselves standing next to the North Korean athlete, listening to a Cello quartet play Smells Like Teen Spirit by Nirvana and Highway to Hell by ACDC. We also appeared to be the only British supporters there. Not that there was any of the British Team present to support, though we did see Simon's second favourite team China, so I guess there's that. 

We'll see you tomorrow.